---
layout: release
class: release
---

## Overview

The Rubinius team is proud to announce the availability of 1.2.0.

1.2.0 is the first feature release since 1.1, containing various feature
introductions, performance improvements, and bugfixes.


## About

Rubinius is a high performance environment for running code written in the
Ruby programming language. It provides a number of virtual machine features
found in other popular language runtimes such as generational garbage
collection, Just-In-Time compilation, and compatibility with existing C APIs.

#### Stats

* **Release Date:** December 21th, 2010
* **Commits:** 242
* **Days since last release:** 36
* **Issues fixed:** _17_ since 1.1.1, _52_ since 1.1.0

#### Authors

* Evan Phoenix
* Brian Ford
* Dirkjan Bussink
* Christopher Bertels
* Matthew Draper
* Victor Hugo Borja
* Ivan Samsonov
* Konstantin Haase
* Eric Kidd
* Adam Gardiner

## Summary

##### Major additions
* Upgrade to LLVM 2.8
* Add a VM level bytecode verifier
* Add Module#dynamic\_method for easily creating bytecode methods
* Compile printf strings to rbx bytecode

##### Tooling
* Various debugger fixes
* Fix incorrect line number issues
* Fix Debugger.start in ruby-debug compat mode

##### Performance
* Improve performance of Array#[]=
* General Array performance improvements
* Improve performance of Fixnum#pow and Bignum#pow
* Fix bug in JIT FFI inliner

##### System
* Add fixes for OpenBSD on a few platforms
* Improve build system to use system settings better
* Run through testing on PPC Linux
* Cleaned up /bin dir. Added links for common commands
* Add detection for gem exes in ARG0 check
* Allow rbx to be linked as a different name to start subcommand

##### Documentation
* Add new docs/website setup
* Add documentation on VM instructions
* Begin German and Spanish translations of docs
* Fix 'rbx report' to use HTTPS

##### Bug fixes
* Allow for English pseudo globals
* Import fix from MRI for Complex
* Fix IO.select bug related to STDIN
* Add meta\_to\_s for use in string interpolation
* Add/fix/improve instruction documentation
* Fix crashing bug in string\_build instruction
* Fix edge case in Bignum#>>
* Fixed MatchData#names to return strings
* Fixed Hash#initialize to return self
* Fixed Bignum#<=> with an object instance
* Conform to MRI behavior for strings with malformed characters
* Fix heap dump to walk Data objects properly from the Query Agent
* Sort out proper logic for Proc.new relating to C-API.
* Don't call Module.append\_features from Kernel#extend

##### C-API
* Implement rb\_yield\_splat
* Implement rb\_f\_sprintf
* Add rb\_proc\_new
* Fix C-API IO from consuming all file descriptors
* Convert C-API T\_xxx enums to defines

##### Closed Issues
* 1a3dce7 %0f is also an allowed format. Fixes #613
* 069061e Force the timezone on checking a Time object. Fixes #615
* a101f9c Test what a pipe is properly. Fixes #605.
* 8833997 Add fixes for OpenBSD on a few platforms. Fixes #586
* 3bb893d Detect and reject rtti being off. Fixes #602
* 4377c50 Only consider certain lines. Fixes #578
* a6952da Remove pathalogical case from Array#[]=. Fixes #604
* ae95ec3 Fix line tuple generation. Fixes #598
* 2624302 Allow for English pseudo globals. Fixes #584
* 94f68ec Be able to select on fd 0. Fixes #591
* be57451 Add ability to know what ip really means. Fixes #590
* 3b2cbad Pull in compiling env flags into RbConfig. Fixes #597
* fa335af Add meta\_to\_s for use in string interpolation. Fixes #596
* 9c38609 Implement rb\_yield\_splat. Fixes #588
* bf27a3b Fix the position of a method call to be the position of the recv. Fixes #571
* 79f4069 Dir.glob yields if there is a block. Fixes #579
* 8912734 Match an empty string properly. Fixes #573

