---
layout: release
class: release
---

## Overview

The Rubinius team is proud to announce the availability of 1.2.2.

1.2.2 is a bugfix release for 1.2.1. It contains a security fix, a few highly
visible bugfixes, a few platform and performance changes.

## About

Rubinius is a high performance environment for running code written in the
Ruby programming language. It provides a number of virtual machine features
found in other popular language runtimes such as generational garbage
collection, Just-In-Time compilation, and compatibility with existing C APIs.

## Summary

#### Stats

* **Release Date:** Feb 22, 2011
* **Commits:** 44
* **Days since last release:** 7
* **Issues fixed:** 6 since 1.2.1

#### Authors

* Brian Ford
* Evan Phoenix
* Dirkjan Bussink
* Jeremy Evans
* Mikko Perttunen
* Wayne E. Seguin

##### Closed Issues

* 7cbb344 Use coersion if possible in StringScanner. Fixes #696
* 94b1db0 Fix memory leak in BERT. Fixes #699
* c38052b Deal with gentoo/linux .so craziness. Fixes #698
* 93e172e Fix crash bug in syck. Fixes #690
* 2aec333 Properly manipulate the GIL around FFI calls (cremes). Fixes #688
* 246963a Allow for defining attribute methods on an immediate. Fixes #694

##### Security
* Updated fileutils.rb to MRI 1.8.7p334 to fix security issue.

##### Bug Fixes
* _(CRASH)_ Allow a CM to have no ConstantScope (alexsuraci)
* _(CRASH)_ Update the current call\_frame when waiting on the GIL.
* _(CRITICAL)_ Enforce compiler signature check (and install the signature).
* Fix EBADF errors by being more careful with fd's and IO objects
* Ignore spurious wakeups in Thread#join
* Fixed Kernel#private\_methods, #public\_methods.
* Fixed Kernel#singleton\_methods.
* Fix object\_id collision between two immediates if a shift would overflow
* Fail out of configure with better info on what happened
* Update rb-readline to 4610e69.
* Fixed issue installing over previous install.

##### Platform
* Rescue all lowlevel errors (OpenBSD raises EPERM sometimes)
* Fix build on OpenBSD

##### Performance
* Introduce object\_instance\_of primitive to speed up type checks

##### Enhancements
* Parse -X options from RBXOPT environment variable.
* Default rbc.db to ./.rbx.

##### Documentation
* Updated how-to/write-a-blog-post/ en doc.
