---
layout: release
class: release
---

## Overview

The Rubinius team is proud to announce the availability of 1.2.3.

1.2.3 is a bugfix release for 1.2.2. It contains a complement of bugfixes
and performance improvements.

## About

Rubinius is a high performance environment for running code written in the
Ruby programming language. It provides a number of virtual machine features
found in other popular language runtimes such as generational garbage
collection, Just-In-Time compilation, and compatibility with existing C APIs.

## Summary

#### Stats

* **Release Date:** Mar 15, 2011
* **Commits:** 212
* **Days since last release:** 21
* **Issues fixed:** 10 since 1.2.2

#### Authors

* Evan Phoenix
* Chuck Remes
* Brian Ford
* Dirkjan Bussink
* Graham (stormbrew)
* burningTyger
* Jeff Siegel
* Christopher Bertels
* Wayne E. Seguin
* Eoin Coffey
* David Waite
* Jari Bakken
* John Mair
* Thiago Pradi
* Ivan Samsonov
* Evan Shaw
* Semyon Perepelitsa
* Wim Looman
* Benedikt Müller
* Aman Gupta

##### Closed Issues

* 678ac9d Use Type.obj\_kind\_of? to a mocked #kind\_of? Fixes #762
* acfa7b7 Module#include should return the target include is called on, Fixes #756
* a6fa69b Revert "Use empty binding to eval gemspecs for caching. Fixes #725"
* ee0c62a Use empty binding to eval gemspecs for caching. Fixes #725
* dda607b Handle last\_match in an inline block properly. Fixes #720
* f92ec4e Bound the C-API cache for a String when first creating it. Fixes #702
* 33c8117 Handle an Alias for an indistinct superclass method. Fixes #722
* 5bd938b Fix typo in doc links. Fixes #717
* ca0c7ef Fixed arity checking for BlockAsMethod. Fixes #686
* 27a4872 Fixed File.expand\_path. Fixes #708

##### Performance

* Begin fleshing out benchmarks with new ips framework
* Performance improvements for Hash#replace, #dup, #reject!, and #reject
* Speed up String#chomp! quite a bit
* Speed up Date.\_parse by removing clever and adding simple
* Improve performance of Time.at with float values
* Speed up Dir[] by breaking out specific cases and reducing stats
* Improve Array#flatten[!] substantially
* Speed up: Array#delete\_at, Array#slice!, and Array#[]=

##### Additions

* Add JOBS= and .be\_gentle to control the number of parallel builds
* Introdue Daedalus, a new native code builder
* Update to RubyGems 1.5.2

##### C-API

* Handle ST\_DELETE returns from the rb\_hash\_foreach callback
* Use single identifier to cause compile error on RHASH(\_TBL).

##### Platform

* FreeBSD doesn't need -ldl and OpenBSD already explicitly has it
* Store the make to use in a variable and default to gmake on BSD platforms
* Modify configuration and VM to support both LLVM 2.8 and 2.9 (rc)

##### Bug Fixes

* _(CRASH)_ Handle break and return in various scopes properly
* _(CRASH)_ Fix reading the number of slots a tuple has
* _(CRASH)_ Ensure VM doesn't improperly unwind into a process exit.
* JIT: Fix returning from a lambda closure
* JIT: Be sure to sign extend the result of an FFI call
* Remove bad $~ assignment code
* Use correct constness for strings returned from the C API
* Update the -v build rev hash every build.
* Fix Hash marshal dump
* Fix YARD bug, don't use the custom classes #initialize
* Fixed Kernel#abort to coerce non-String arguments.
* JIT: Handle raise\_return in all contexts properly (fancy)
* Clarify language/break specs for non-compliant rbx behavior.
* Preserve ancestor chain of singleton class for a dupped class.
* Fix for Exception#backtrace returning nil when @locations are missing.
* Fix URI() to return the argument if it is a URI object
* Remove old references to Rubinius::Scheduler
* Run IO finalizers after we've shut down all other threads
* Eval the gemspec cache in an empty binding.
* Fix how and where eval locals are created
* Fixing Hash[] method when passing an array
* Properly detect a constant directory in Dir::Glob
* Permit inspecting a Method having NativeMethod.
* Reset allocations\_ so we don't keep recontributing them
* JIT: Use the custom static scope in a block (dbussink)
* Fixed Kernel#singleton\_methods to return a unique list.
* Added Module#define\_method with block specs for arity checking.
* raise ArgumentError when no block is given in Module#define\_method
