---
layout: release
class: release
---

## Overview

The Rubinius team is proud to announce the availability of 1.2.4.

1.2.4 is a bugfix release for 1.2.3. It contains a large number of bug and
compatibility fixes as well as a handful of performance improvements.

Starting with this release, the github repository has changed.
It is now located at [http://github.com/rubinius/rubinius](http://github.com/rubinius/rubinius).


## About

Rubinius is a high performance environment for running code written in the
Ruby programming language. It provides a number of virtual machine features
found in other popular language runtimes such as generational garbage
collection, Just-In-Time compilation, and compatibility with existing C APIs.

## Summary

#### Stats

* **Release Date:** Jul 05, 2011
* **Commits:** 675
* **Days since last release:** 112
* **Issues fixed:** 49 since 1.2.3

#### Authors

* Evan Phoenix
* Brian Ford
* Pavel Argentov
* Dirkjan Bussink
* burningTyger
* Nikolai Lugovoi
* Karol Hosiawa
* Maximilian Lupke
* Chuck Remes
* Shane Becker
* nazgob
* Max Lupke
* Charles Oliver Nutter
* MenTaLguY
* Flavio Castelli
* Aman Gupta
* Gibheer
* Ivan Samsonov
* heron lee medeiros
* Victor Costan
* Wayne E. Seguin
* Jorge Dias
* Konstantin Haase
* Christopher Bertels
* Peter Suschlik
* Samsonov Ivan
* David Czarnecki
* Jesse Cooke
* Tony Arcieri
* eianco
* Brian Miller
* srawlins
* Heron Medeiros
* Markus Prinz
* Franck Verrot
* Lars Gierth
* Matthew Draper
* Dudley Flanders
* Josep M. Bach
* Herminio Torres
* Chris Bunch
* Wim Looman
* Graham Batty
* jc00ke
* Dr Nic Williams
* Aaron Patterson
* Jano González
* Gonçalo Silva
* Gildo Fiorito
* Jeremy Evans
* George Ogata
* Lionel Orry
* Matthijs van der Vleuten
* Mike Perham
* Petr Hosek
* Postmodern
* Przemek Owczarek
* Przemysław Grzegorczyk
* Santosh Kumar
* Stanislav Sedov
* Chris Lee
* Steve Klabnik
* fyskij
* hosiawak
* leoncio caminha
* Aviv Ben-Yosef
* ren
* Albert Vernon
* Scott Noel-Hemming

##### Closed Issues

* 47c3b17 Move prototypes to util to mitigate nokogiri bug. Fixes #1061
* 45e0601 Add HAVE\_ macros for blocking region stuff. Fixes #977
* f6567b8 Don't use Kernel#sleep to know how much time has past. Fixes #986
* ee2bdc2 Make sure that a local addrinfo side is found. Fixes #989
* 3fa02ec Fix CompiledMethod#locate\_line. Fixes #1040
* f6ac3c8 Include stdint.h where it's needed. Fixes #1036
* ecadf56 Fix []= with splats and all that jazz. Fixes #1021
* 57b1181 Fix Method#parameters for non-CompiledMethods. Fixes #925
* 6e3be13 Fix Thread.new, .start, and .fork. Fixes #945
* 5637a52 Guard all NME operations that need an NMF. Fixes #935
* aeced68 Add rb\_check\_to\_integer, Fixes #933
* 38a5f97 Add support for -s on the cli. Fixes #879
* 52532b0 Don't count a space leader request against the total width. Fixes #893
* bef7f50 Handle certain operator symbol values specially. Fixes #895
* 06da168 Handle STDIN being closed by default. Fixes #916
* a81a80d Only check frozen if there is modification in Array#delete. Fixes #913
* 75a1817 Create a specific Time subclass. Fixes #902
* 675e9ca Provide size for converting byte\_array into string. Fixes #887
* 6a5cd94 Handle reopening a module that was included into Object. Fixes #883
* 185efbf Fix Object.const\_defined? wrt include modules. Fixes #865
* cf9aea7 Exclude singleton classes from OS.each\_object. Fixes #867
* 7c0371e Set -P option to compiler to print the AST. Fixes #861
* dba9314 Handle detect the ip for a line better. Fixes #719
* 06c3412 in Array#==, use the raw Tuples. Fixes #822
* 3973f6d Move Module#constants/constants\_table => constant\_table. Fixes #735
* 02330f0 Use an offensive copy in Array#permutation. Fixes #775
* c401af1 Add Rubinius.current\_file. Fixes #841
* 944a6d1 Fix build on FreeBSD - Fixes #844
* 9c72fba Conditional SSLv2 usage. Fixes #818
* f079e72 Handle Marshal'ing a Mutex and Channel better. Fixes #821
* 9f3d790 Add rb\_cMethod. Fixes #816
* f1c6d65 Remove duplicate local names from #local\_variables. Fixes #772
* 9693227 Don't screw with vcall new. Fixes #777
* e70c097 Disable fibers on >= 10.7. Fixes #815
* 29e5f49 Apply StringScanner speedup patch. Fixes #716
* 0640ece Apply patch for todo. Fixes #810
* 087ae79 Handle the GIL around FFI callbacks. Fixes #796
* d3026d6 Read the static scope for an inlined block properly. Fixes #807
* c2992f9 Also install tooling extensions. Fixes #806
* 26b1398 assume RWX memory is available for ffi on linux (jit requirement); selinux users: setsebool allow\_execmem true. Fixes #782
* 115c1a0 improve performance of Time#<=>. Fixes #785
* cf71b7d correct BigDecimal::ROUND\_HALF\_DOWN/ROUND\_HALF\_EVEN behavior. Fixes #781
* d962458 Ignore requests to set DATA unless in the main script. Fixes #790
* b653999 Marshal.load raises ArgumentError on unknown class/modules (Fixes #791)
* 2675eb8 Make sure that String::c\_str() unshares before clamping. Fixes #793
* 596adbb rb\_ary\_reverse reverses in-place (Fixes #792)
* 44b68fc Added testrb bin from MRI. Fixes #788
* bd3deed Put IRB help in the right place. Fixes #783
* f4210b9 Fix tested braces in Dir.glob (@meadow). Fixes #778

##### Documentation
* New blog post: rubinius around the world map and pins of shirts/tshirts
* New blog post: rubinius summit hollywood edition june twenty oh elleven
* Added AST docs
* Add German translation of GC docs
* Updated spanish translation to the How-To Write Documentation page
* Translated debugger and memory analysis to Polish
* New blog Post: 2.0 Developer Preview.
* Start French documentation
* Translating Rubinius English Documentation to Portuguese Brazilian - Appendix b
* New blog post: rubinius rewards
* Add brief overview of Actors to concurrency docs
* FreeBSD notice in Requirements
* Updated RVM section in Readme with more detail and clarity.
* New blog post: Running Ruby With No Ruby.

##### Platform Fixes
* Add a bunch of errno's from FreeBSD

##### Performance Fixes
* Speed up capi::HandleSet by adding an allocationless fast path
* Increase the malloc threshold to 100M
* 3x speedup in String#insert
* String#[] perf improved by 55% for the Fixnum case by removing not needed coerce\_to
* Speed up some easy case for Array#\*
* Speed up Array#map and #map! by 3x
* Increase performance of Module#public\_/private\_ and protected\_methods
* Improve perf of Module#instance\_methods and LookupTable#each
* Speed up Dir.glob for realistic workloads
* Improve the performance of mp\_set\_long
* Improve performance of Time#to\_f

##### Additions
* Added Rubinius::KERNEL\_PATH and install kernel .rb files.
* Add ability to display CAPI methods in backtraces
* Slow but usable IO.ioctl
* Add FFI::Pointer.size for compatibility with ruby-ffi
* Add ability to set the marksweep allocation threshold
* Added version checking to rbc loading.
* Improve the details the VM can show about a CompiledMethod
* New blog post: adam prescott on scopes in rubinius
* Remove Moment, not in use.
* Added -Xprofiler.output=name option.
* Simplify FalseClass#^.
* Ignore tooling/profiler generated Makefile.
* Move profiler to generic tooling framework
* Add rb\_struct\_getmember to CAPI
* Add rb\_alias to CAPI
* Add rb\_ary\_to\_ary to CAPI
* **BIG** improvement for Time#<=>, credit should go to meadow
* Add tool for rendering call graph as HTML
* Add @avibryant's protobuf decoding benchmark
* Update to latest OpenSSL extension from 1.8.7
* Add ability to disable inlining a method preemptively

##### Bug Fixes
* Load correct digest file, fixes broken Rubygems
* Fix Module#dup: use the direct\_superclass instead of superclass
* Fixing inplace edit when no backup extension provided
* Add CodeLoader.compiled\_hook, triggered after a source file is compiled
* Ported OpenStruct fix from MRI.
* Tag OpenStruct failures.
* Let IO#each increase the line count
* Memory allocated with ALLOC\_N not freed by XFREE in edge cases
* Add spec for File.owned? and fix a bug
* Fixed memory leak, memory allocated by new[] was freed by delete instead of delete[]
* Removed characters accessor from String.
* Add 'more correct' -S flag for running gem commands in README
* Add support for -i CLI option
* Pick the proper local address to bind with
* Stop currently running methods to fix profiler results
* Fix SortedSet to ensure objects comparable with <=>
* Translate appendix-a-glossary.markdown to pt-br
* Fixed rb\_num2long, rb\_num2ulong.
* Reenter managed mode BEFORE creating an FFI result object
* Honor Time subclasses in the right places
* **rbx report** should not fail silently when Gist submission didn't work
* Add bounds checking to to\_chars and make sure it's 0 terminated
* Add dummy P rules for pack/unpack
* Have libc include a version number to deal with gentoo
* Fixed File.directory?.
* Allow rbx\_meta\_to\_s to raise an exception
* Make Module#const\_get the proper arity (rails fix)
* Fix Kernel#binding and it's self(ish) rules
* Freeze strings returned by ENV.[].
* Fix <=, ==, >= comparisons to avoid trivial object identity comparisons.
* Bounds check and avoid c\_str() in Regexp prims
* Fix building with LLVM disabled
* Add workaround for setting ruby\_verbose / ruby\_debug in C extensions
* Fix render\_profile, scripts, and thread runtimes
* Use Type.object\_kind\_of? instead of Class.===.
* Use object's #respond\_to? in Type.try\_convert.
* Add additional safety checks to using the data of a String in the vm
* Correct mistaken usage of $stdin instead of $stdout in putc
* Fix #source\_location for methods defined using define\_method.
* Fix Marshal.dump for 64-bit Fixnum
* Errno::ISCONN -> Errno::EISCONN
* Marshal.load wraps NameError in ArgumentError
* Fixed YAML parsing second fraction to microseconds from iso8601 date
* Fix colliding Hash#entries method name
* Fix build on OpenBSD
* Fixed Array.slice!(0) for consecutive calls
* Fix Enumerable.include?(obj) to use call e\_item==(obj), not obj==(e\_item)
* Force LLVM to treat sandy bridge as core2
