---
layout: doc_it
title: How-To - Write Documentation
previous: Write a Blog Post
previous_url: how-to/write-a-blog-post
next: Translate Documentation
next_url: how-to/translate-documentation
---

The Rubinius documentation is integrated with the website and blog. It uses
Jekyll just like the other components.

To get started, ensure you have the `kramdown` and `jekyll` gems installed.

    rbx gem install jekyll kramdown

The documentation source is under the `web/doc` directory. There are
subdirectories for each language to which the documentation has been
translated (eg `en`, `es`, etc.).

There is a Table of Contents for each translation (e.g.
`/web/doc/en/index.markdown`). The rest of the documentation consists of
single files that have YAML attributes to specify how the documents are
connected. Essentially, the documentation can be viewed as a doubly-linked
list of documents with each document pointing to the previous and next
document. The Table of Contents document shows the complete structure.

The YAML attributes in a document look like the following:

    ---
    layout: doc_it
    title: How-To - Write Documentation
    previous: Write a Blog Post
    previous_url: how-to/write-a-blog-post
    next: Translate Documentation
    next_url: how-to/translate-documentation
    ---

The _layout_ specifies which Jekyll layout to use when formatting the
document. The _layout_ should be `doc_LANG`, where _LANG_ is the ISO-639-2
code for the language.

The _title_ specifies the document title that is displayed at the top of the
page.

The _previous_ and _previous\_url_ attributes give the title and link to the
previous document. Likewise, the _next_ and _next\_url_ attributes give the
title and link for the next document. These are used to enhance browsing the
documentation and limiting the amount of work necessary to re-order parts of
the documentation.

Both the source for the documentation and the files generated by Jekyll are
committed to the Rubinius repository. When people clone the source repository,
they can run `rake docs` to view the documentation before they have built
Rubinius or if having problems building Rubinius.


### Editing Existing Documentation

An initial outline for the documentation has been created. There are many
topics that merely need to have documentation written for them.

To add documentation for an existing topic or to fix existing documentation:

1. Open the file for the topic under `web/doc/LANG`.
1. Add or improve the documentation.
1. To view your updates while you are working on them, run
   `rbx -S jekyll serve --watch` in the `web/` directory.
1. Once finished adding or editing documentation, commit your changes to the
   source files.
1. Run `rbx -S jekyll build` in the `web/` directory to force update of all
   generated files in `web/_site`.
1. Commit the generated files. If making a small change, the generated files
   can be committed with the documentation source files. If making many
   changes, commit the generated files separately to make reviewing changes
   more simple.


### Adding New Documentation

To add documentation for which no existing topic exists:

1. Create a new file with the .markdown extension under `web/doc/LANG`.
1. Set up the attributes to link the new file into the existing files. This
   will require editing the _previous_ and _next_ attributes of the existing
   files to insert the new file, as well as adding an entry to
   `index.markdown`.
1. To view your updates while you are working on them, run
   `rbx -S jekyll --server --auto`
1. Edit the new file using Markdown syntax.
1. Once finished adding or editing documentation, commit your changes to the
   source files.
1. Run `rbx -S jekyll` in the `web/` directory to force update of all
   generated files in `web/_site`.
1. Commit the generated files. If making a small change, the generated files
   can be committed with the documentation source files. If making many
   changes, commit the generated files separately to make reviewing changes
   more simple.
